CS601PC: MACHINE LEARNING

Course Objectives:
 To introduce students to the basic concepts and techniques of Machine Learning.
 To have a thorough understanding of the Supervised and Unsupervised learning techniques
 To study the various probability-based learning techniques

Course Outcomes:
 Distinguish between, supervised, unsupervised and semi-supervised learning
 Understand algorithms for building classifiers applied on datasets of non-linearly separable
classes
 Understand the principles of evolutionary computing algorithms
 Design an ensembler to increase the classification accuracy

UNIT - I
Learning – Types of Machine Learning – Supervised Learning – The Brain and the Neuron – Design a
Learning System – Perspectives and Issues in Machine Learning – Concept Learning Task – Concept
Learning as Search – Finding a Maximally Specific Hypothesis – Version Spaces and the Candidate
Elimination Algorithm – Linear Discriminants: – Perceptron – Linear Separability – Linear Regression.

UNIT - II
Multi-layer Perceptron– Going Forwards – Going Backwards: Back Propagation Error – Multi-layer
Perceptron in Practice – Examples of using the MLP – Overview – Deriving Back-Propagation – Radial
Basis Functions and Splines – Concepts – RBF Network – Curse of Dimensionality – Interpolations and
Basis Functions – Support Vector Machines

UNIT - III
Learning with Trees – Decision Trees – Constructing Decision Trees – Classification and Regression
Trees – Ensemble Learning – Boosting – Bagging – Different ways to Combine Classifiers – Basic
Statistics – Gaussian Mixture Models – Nearest Neighbor Methods – Unsupervised Learning – K means
Algorithms

UNIT - IV
Dimensionality Reduction – Linear Discriminant Analysis – Principal Component Analysis – Factor
Analysis – Independent Component Analysis – Locally Linear Embedding – Isomap – Least Squares
Optimization
Evolutionary Learning – Genetic algorithms – Genetic Offspring: - Genetic Operators – Using Genetic
algorithms

UNIT - V
Reinforcement Learning – Overview – Getting Lost Example
Markov Chain Monte Carlo Methods – Sampling – Proposal Distribution – Markov Chain Monte Carlo
– Graphical Models – Bayesian Networks – Markov Random Fields – Hidden Markov Models – Tracking
Methods

TEXT BOOKS:
1. Stephen Marsland, ―Machine Learning – An Algorithmic Perspective, Second Edition,
Chapman and Hall/CRC Machine Learning and Pattern Recognition Series, 2014.

REFERENCE BOOKS:
1. Tom M Mitchell, ―Machine Learning, First Edition, McGraw Hill Education, 2013.
2. Peter Flach, ―Machine Learning: The Art and Science of Algorithms that Make Sense of Data‖,
First Edition, Cambridge University Press, 2012.
3. Jason Bell, ―Machine learning – Hands on for Developers and Technical Professionals‖, First
Edition, Wiley, 2014
4. Ethem Alpaydin, ―Introduction to Machine Learning 3e (Adaptive Computation and Machine
Learning Series), Third Edition, MIT Press, 2014