CE6000E: DISASTER PREPAREDNESS & PLANNING MANAGEMENT

Course Objectives: The objectives of the course are
To Understand basic concepts in Disaster Management
To Understand Definitions and Terminologies used in Disaster Management
To Understand Types and Categories of Disasters
To Understand the Challenges posed by Disasters
To understand Impacts of Disasters Key Skills

Course Outcomes: The student will develop competencies in
the application of Disaster Concepts to Management
Analyzing Relationship between Development and Disasters.
Ability to understand Categories of Disasters and realization of the responsibilities to society

UNIT-1
Introduction Concepts and definitions: disaster, hazard, vulnerability, resilience, risks severity, frequency and details, capacity, impact, prevention, mitigation.

UNIT-II
Disasters Disasters classification; natural disasters (floods, draught, cyclones, volcanoes, earthquakes, tsunami, landslides, coastal erosion, soil erosion, forest fires etc.); manmade disasters (industrial pollution, artificial flooding in urban areas, nuclear radiation, chemical spills, transportation accidents, terrorist strikes, etc.); hazard and vulnerability profile of India, mountain and coastal areas, ecological fragility.

UNIT-III
Disaster Impacts Disaster impacts (environmental, physical, social, ecological, economic, political, etc.); health, psycho-social issues; demographic aspects (gender, age, special needs); hazard locations; global and national disaster trends, climate change and urban disasters.

UNIT-IV
Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) Disaster management cycle its phases; prevention, mitigation, preparedness, relief and recovery; structural and non-structural measures; risk analysis, vulnerability and capacity assessment; early warning systems, Post disaster environmental response (water, sanitation, food safety, waste management, disease control, security, communications); Roles and responsibilities of government, community, local institutions, NGOs and other stakeholders; Policies and legislation for disaster risk reduction, DRR programmes in India and the activities of National Disaster Management Authority.

UNIT-V
Disasters, Environment and Development Factors affecting vulnerability such as impact of developmental projects and environmental modifications (including of dams, landuse changes, urbanization etc.), sustainable and environmental friendly recovery; reconstruction and development methods.

TEXT BOOKS:
1. Pradeep Sahni, 2004, Disaster Risk Reduction in South Asia, Prentice Hall.
2. Singh B.K., 2008, Handbook of Disaster Management: Techniques & Guidelines, Rajat Publication
3. Ghosh G.K., 2006, Disaster Management, APH Publishing Corporation

REFERENCE BOOKS:
1. http://ndma.gov.in/ (Home page of National Disaster Management Authority)
2. http://www.ndmindia.nic.in/ (National Disaster management in India, Ministry of Home Affairs).
3. Disaster Medical Systems Guidelines. Emergency Medical Services Authority, State of California, EMSA no.214, June 2003 4. Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) (Feb. 2007), IASC Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings. Geneva: IASC