CS635PE: SOFTWARE TESTING METHODOLOGIES (Professional Elective – III)

Course Objectives
 To provide knowledge of the concepts in software testing such as testing process, criteria,
strategies, and methodologies.
 To develop skills in software test automation and management using the latest tools.

Course Outcomes:
 Understand purpose of testing and path testing
 Understand strategies in data flow testing and domain testing
 Develop logic-based test strategies
 Understand graph matrices and its applications
 Implement test cases using any testing automation tool

UNIT - I
Introduction: Purpose of testing, Dichotomies, model for testing, consequences of bugs, taxonomy of
bugs Flow graphs and Path testing: Basics concepts of path testing, predicates, path predicates and
achievable paths, path sensitizing, path instrumentation, application of path testing.

UNIT - II
Transaction Flow Testing: transaction flows, transaction flow testing techniques.
Data Flow testing: Basics of data flow testing, strategies in data flow testing, application of data flow
testing.
Domain Testing: domains and paths, Nice & ugly domains, domain testing, domains and interfaces
testing, domain and interface testing, domains and testability.

UNIT - III
Paths, Path products and Regular expressions: path products & path expression, reduction procedure,
applications, regular expressions & flow anomaly detection.
Logic Based Testing: overview, decision tables, path expressions, kv charts, specifications.

UNIT - IV
State, State Graphs and Transition testing: state graphs, good & bad state graphs, state testing,
Testability tips.

UNIT - V
Graph Matrices and Application: Motivational overview, matrix of graph, relations, power of a matrix,
node reduction algorithm, building tools. (Student should be given an exposure to a tool like
Jmeter/selenium/soapUI/Catalon).

TEXT BOOKS:
1. Software Testing techniques - Baris Beizer, Dreamtech, second edition.
2. Software Testing Tools – Dr. K. V. K. K. Prasad, Dreamtech.

REFERENCE BOOKS:
1. The craft of software testing - Brian Marick, Pearson Education.
2. Software Testing Techniques – SPD(Oreille)
3. Software Testing in the Real World – Edward Kit, Pearson.
4. Effective methods of Software Testing, Perry, John Wiley.
5. Art of Software Testing – Meyers, John Wiley